README.md, before:

# toy-pdf-rag
A toy pdf RAG example for self-learning. See the [post](https://seanzw.github.io/posts/simple-document-rag/).

### Setup & Use (Windows)

This single, step-by-step section shows how to set up and run the tool on a fresh Windows machine. Follow each numbered step exactly. If you are not sure what to click or type, follow the sub-steps.

1) Open PowerShell (the Windows terminal you'll use)
    - Method A (Start menu): Click the Windows Start button, type `PowerShell`, then click `Windows PowerShell` or `PowerShell` to open it.
    - Method B (from File Explorer): Open File Explorer, go to any folder, click the address bar, type `powershell` and press Enter — PowerShell will open in that folder.
    - To open PowerShell as administrator: Click Start, type `PowerShell`, then right-click `Windows PowerShell` and choose **Run as administrator**.

2) Install Ollama and pull the retrieval model
    - Download and install Ollama from https://ollama.com/ (choose the Windows installer). Follow the installer prompts.
    - After installation, open PowerShell and run:
```powershell
ollama pull dengcao/Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B:F16
```
This downloads the local retrieval/embedding model the project uses.

3) Install Python and add it to PATH
    - Download the latest Python 3 installer for Windows from https://www.python.org/downloads/windows/.
    - Run the installer and IMPORTANT: check the box that says **Add Python to PATH** before clicking Install.
    - If you already installed Python without checking that box, add it manually:
      - Press Start, type **Edit the system environment variables**, open it, click **Environment Variables...**, select the `Path` line under your user variables, click **Edit**, then **New** and add both (example paths — replace with your actual install path):
         - `C:\Users\YourName\AppData\Local\Programs\Python\Python3X\`
         - `C:\Users\YourName\AppData\Local\Programs\Python\Python3X\Scripts\`
      - Click OK to save.
    - Verify Python is available by opening a new PowerShell window and running:
```powershell
python --version
```

4) Open PowerShell in the project folder (where `pdf_analyze.py` is)
    - Using File Explorer: navigate to the project folder (the folder that contains `pdf_analyze.py`), click the address bar, type `powershell` and press Enter.
    - Or, in File Explorer, hold Shift, right-click the folder background and choose **Open PowerShell window here** (or **Open in Terminal**, then choose PowerShell).

5) Create and activate a Python virtual environment named `pdf-rag`
In the PowerShell window that is already in the project folder, run:
```powershell
python -m venv pdf-rag
```

Activate the venv:
```powershell
.\pdf-rag\Scripts\Activate.ps1
```

If PowerShell blocks script execution, allow local scripts (you may need to run PowerShell as administrator for this command the first time):
```powershell
Set-ExecutionPolicy -ExecutionPolicy RemoteSigned -Scope CurrentUser
.\pdf-rag\Scripts\Activate.ps1
```

(If you prefer Command Prompt instead of PowerShell, activate with `.
pdf-rag\Scripts\activate`.)

6) Install required Python packages
    - With the `pdf-rag` venv activated, run:
```powershell
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

7) Add your API key (optional if using local-only models)
    - Create a file named `api_key.py` in the project root (same folder as `pdf_analyze.py`).
    - Put your key into the file like this (replace the placeholder text with your real key):
```python
API_KEY = "your_api_key_here"
```

Note: If you plan to run reasoning locally with Ollama models, you do not need an API key.

How to run the analyzer (every time you use the tool)
 - 1) Start the Ollama retrieval model (keep this running):
```powershell
ollama run dengcao/Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B:F16
```
  Keep that PowerShell window open — it serves embedding requests.

 - 2) Open a new PowerShell window, navigate to the project folder, and activate the `pdf-rag` venv:
```powershell
cd C:\path\to\toy-pdf-rag
.\pdf-rag\Scripts\Activate.ps1
```

 - 3) Run the analyzer on your PDF (replace the path with your PDF location):
```powershell
python pdf_analyze.py .\materials\dsv3.pdf
```
  The tool will save JSON and Markdown outputs next to the PDF (e.g., `materials/dsv3.result_001.md`).

If anything fails, check the specific command output in PowerShell and make sure:
- You opened PowerShell in the project folder.
- The `pdf-rag` virtual environment is activated before running `pip` or `python`.
- Ollama is running the retrieval model if you rely on local embeddings.

This section aims to be explicit for new Windows users; if you'd like I can also add screenshots or convert these steps into a short script you can run.

### Example

In `queries.txt`, I prepared two questions:

```
What is the main contribution of this paper?

Does this paper compare with other models?
```

Then I run

```bash
python pdf_analyzer.py materials/dsv3.pdf
```

The answer:

```json
            "answers": [
                {
                    "question": "What is the main contribution of this paper?",
                    "answer": 1,
                    "explanation": "Yes. The main contributions include developing DeepSeek-R1-Zero through pure reinforcement learning without supervised fine-tuning (SFT), creating a pipeline for DeepSeek-R1 with RL and SFT stages, and demonstrating effective distillation of reasoning capabilities into smaller models, as detailed in the contributions section. (Page 4)",
                    "total_question_idx": 1
                },
                {
                    "question": "Does this paper compare with other models?",
                    "answer": 1,
                    "explanation": "Yes. The paper compares DeepSeek models with other models such as GPT-4o, Claude-3.5-Sonnet, OpenAI-o1-mini, QwQ-32B-Preview, and DeepSeek-V3 across benchmarks like AIME 2024, MATH-500, GPQA Diamond, and LiveCodeBench, as shown in evaluation tables and discussions. (Pages 4, 14, 15)",
                    "total_question_idx": 2
                }
            ]
```

You can find the full markdown result in `materials/dsv3.result_001.md`.

Commit message:

emphasize the ollama version to be 11.6

README.md, after:

# toy-pdf-rag
A toy pdf RAG example for self-learning. See the [post](https://seanzw.github.io/posts/simple-document-rag/).

### Setup & Use (Windows)

This single, step-by-step section shows how to set up and run the tool on a fresh Windows machine. Follow each numbered step exactly. If you are not sure what to click or type, follow the sub-steps.

1) Open PowerShell (the Windows terminal you'll use)
    - Method A (Start menu): Click the Windows Start button, type `PowerShell`, then click `Windows PowerShell` or `PowerShell` to open it.
    - Method B (from File Explorer): Open File Explorer, go to any folder, click the address bar, type `powershell` and press Enter — PowerShell will open in that folder.
    - To open PowerShell as administrator: Click Start, type `PowerShell`, then right-click `Windows PowerShell` and choose **Run as administrator**.

2) Install Ollama and pull the retrieval model
    - Download and install Ollama from https://ollama.com/ (choose the Windows installer). Follow the installer prompts.
    - Important: use Ollama **v11.6**. Starting from Ollama v12, some models (including `dengcao/Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B:F16`) may report "this model does not support embeddings". To avoid that issue, download and install Ollama v11.6 from the official releases page:
      https://github.com/ollama/ollama/releases
      Find **v11.6**, open the assets for that release, and download `OllamaSetup.exe`.
    - After installation, open PowerShell and run:
```powershell
ollama pull dengcao/Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B:F16
```
    - This downloads the local retrieval/embedding model the project uses. If you see an error complaining the model doesn't support embeddings, check your Ollama version and reinstall v11.6 as described above.

3) Install Python and add it to PATH
    - Download the latest Python 3 installer for Windows from https://www.python.org/downloads/windows/.
    - Run the installer and IMPORTANT: check the box that says **Add Python to PATH** before clicking Install.
    - If you already installed Python without checking that box, add it manually:
      - Press Start, type **Edit the system environment variables**, open it, click **Environment Variables...**, select the `Path` line under your user variables, click **Edit**, then **New** and add both (example paths — replace with your actual install path):
         - `C:\Users\YourName\AppData\Local\Programs\Python\Python3X\`
         - `C:\Users\YourName\AppData\Local\Programs\Python\Python3X\Scripts\`
      - Click OK to save.
    - Verify Python is available by opening a new PowerShell window and running:
```powershell
python --version
```

4) Open PowerShell in the project folder (where `pdf_analyze.py` is)
    - Using File Explorer: navigate to the project folder (the folder that contains `pdf_analyze.py`), click the address bar, type `powershell` and press Enter.
    - Or, in File Explorer, hold Shift, right-click the folder background and choose **Open PowerShell window here** (or **Open in Terminal**, then choose PowerShell).

5) Create and activate a Python virtual environment named `pdf-rag`
In the PowerShell window that is already in the project folder, run:
```powershell
python -m venv pdf-rag
```

Activate the venv:
```powershell
.\pdf-rag\Scripts\Activate.ps1
```

If PowerShell blocks script execution, allow local scripts (you may need to run PowerShell as administrator for this command the first time):
```powershell
Set-ExecutionPolicy -ExecutionPolicy RemoteSigned -Scope CurrentUser
.\pdf-rag\Scripts\Activate.ps1
```

(If you prefer Command Prompt instead of PowerShell, activate with `.
pdf-rag\Scripts\activate`.)

6) Install required Python packages
    - With the `pdf-rag` venv activated, run:
```powershell
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

7) Add your API key (optional if using local-only models)
    - Create a file named `api_key.py` in the project root (same folder as `pdf_analyze.py`).
    - Put your key into the file like this (replace the placeholder text with your real key):
```python
API_KEY = "your_api_key_here"
```

Note: If you plan to run reasoning locally with Ollama models, you do not need an API key.

How to run the analyzer (every time you use the tool)
 - 1) Start the Ollama retrieval model (keep this running):
```powershell
ollama run dengcao/Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B:F16
```
  Keep that PowerShell window open — it serves embedding requests.

 - 2) Open a new PowerShell window, navigate to the project folder, and activate the `pdf-rag` venv:
```powershell
cd C:\path\to\toy-pdf-rag
.\pdf-rag\Scripts\Activate.ps1
```

 - 3) Run the analyzer on your PDF (replace the path with your PDF location):
```powershell
python pdf_analyze.py .\materials\dsv3.pdf
```
  The tool will save JSON and Markdown outputs next to the PDF (e.g., `materials/dsv3.result_001.md`).

If anything fails, check the specific command output in PowerShell and make sure:
- You opened PowerShell in the project folder.
- The `pdf-rag` virtual environment is activated before running `pip` or `python`.
- Ollama is running the retrieval model if you rely on local embeddings.

This section aims to be explicit for new Windows users; if you'd like I can also add screenshots or convert these steps into a short script you can run.

### Example

In `queries.txt`, I prepared two questions:

```
What is the main contribution of this paper?

Does this paper compare with other models?
```

Then I run

```bash
python pdf_analyzer.py materials/dsv3.pdf
```

The answer:

```json
            "answers": [
                {
                    "question": "What is the main contribution of this paper?",
                    "answer": 1,
                    "explanation": "Yes. The main contributions include developing DeepSeek-R1-Zero through pure reinforcement learning without supervised fine-tuning (SFT), creating a pipeline for DeepSeek-R1 with RL and SFT stages, and demonstrating effective distillation of reasoning capabilities into smaller models, as detailed in the contributions section. (Page 4)",
                    "total_question_idx": 1
                },
                {
                    "question": "Does this paper compare with other models?",
                    "answer": 1,
                    "explanation": "Yes. The paper compares DeepSeek models with other models such as GPT-4o, Claude-3.5-Sonnet, OpenAI-o1-mini, QwQ-32B-Preview, and DeepSeek-V3 across benchmarks like AIME 2024, MATH-500, GPQA Diamond, and LiveCodeBench, as shown in evaluation tables and discussions. (Pages 4, 14, 15)",
                    "total_question_idx": 2
                }
            ]
```

You can find the full markdown result in `materials/dsv3.result_001.md`.
